Double-blind peer review 

I am a researcher and a blogger. I do not consider myself an expert in science publishing or reviewing. Thus I hope you will take my commentary as that of a fellow computer scientist and nothing more.


There are many undesirable biases involved in a professional setting. 
Of course, there are undesirable biases against some minorities and women. 
And it should be clear that I am not, ever,
going to deny the significance of the problem. There are other biases
as well. There are indications that
the prestige of the author can be a determining factor when judging a piece 
of work. People generally
tend to review people who are like themselves more highly. There are undesirable orthodoxy biases as well: 
uncommon ideas are far more difficult to defend even when the most common ideas have not been revisited lately.
Conventional affiliations are more highly rated than unconventionally affilliations.

Yet we should not immediately accept that hiding the identity of the author is the solution. 
Though double-blind peer review can be used to diagnose a problem, it does not follow
that double-blind peer review is itself desirable.

Clearly, we believe that we can effectively combat undesirable prejudices in 
hiring since most employers do not hire based on a double-blind process. 
PhD students submit their thesis for review without hiding their name.
We give talks as we are even though there are biases against small, old or balding people, against obese people and against ugly or unconventional looking people.


I was co-chair of the NSERC Computer Science commmittee in 2019-2020. NSERC is the equivalent of the American NSF.
In Canada, during grant applications, we have the name and the affiliation of the individual,
both of which can be misused. As everone knows, it is often possible to determine the gender and maybe even guess the skin
colour from someone's name. There is every reason to believe that the affilation (prestigious or not)
will introduce some kind of biases, but it is still front and center.
 During deliberations, we are, however, forbidden from using gendered language.
We are similarly forbidden from unwarranted qualifications based on the affiliation. It goes without saying that open racial prejudice is unacceptable.

So why would we not want to hide the identity of the researchers despite the apparent advantages?


Telling someone from a poorly known organization, from a poor or non-English country or from non-dominant gender that
they need to hide who they are to be treated fairly is not altoghether a positive message.  Stressing biases without properly
addressing them can render fields unattractive to those who might suffer from these biases.

I have been posting most my papers online, prior to peer review on arXiv or others servers, sometimes years before
they are even submitted. I write all my software openly, engaging freely with multiple engineers and researchers.
I practice what I call open scholarship. I have a physical lab with computers in them, but my real lab. is out
there on the Internet where I am part of an extended network. I have published well cited papers with people who
do not even have a high school degree, from non-English countries. Open scholarship leads to a glorious view of the world.
 Are we to accept that it is a privilege that only a  white man from an English speaking country may enjoy? 
 This seems a pessismistic outlook.


Moreover, when I work on a problem, I like to identify the trends, the players. Even in computer
science, there is a narrative to the research. At NSERC, we want researchers to present a 
research program. A program is more than a collection of papers. When I provide feedback to an
author, I seek to help them more than to judge them. Where they started and where they are going
matters to me, because it helps me to understand their choices. You may think that who the authors
are should not matter, but it is a very idealized view of the world.

And what happens after the work has been accepted. When the referees are biased, why would the readers not be 
biased as well? What is more important,  the readers or the reviewers? Do we write papers to be published or
to be read? I vote for the latter without hesitation. Are we all about maximizing the impact factor or do we care
to produce impactful research?

There is no free lunch. Double-blind peer review is not without cost.

Blank in  The American Economic Review reported that authors from outside academia have a lower acceptance rate under 
double-blind peer review. Moreover, Blank indicates that double-blind peer review is overall harsher.


Blank, R.M., The effects of double-blind versus single-blind reviewing: Experimental evidence from the American 
Economic Review, The American Economic Review 81 (5), 1991.


This "harsh" nature has been replicated and quantified. Double-Blind Peer Review manuscripts are less likely 
to be successful than Single-Blind Peer Review manuscripts.

McGillivray, B., De Ranieri, E. Uptake and outcome of manuscripts in Nature journals by review model and author characteristics. Res Integr Peer Rev 3, 5 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1186/s41073-018-0049-z

So there are unintended consequences to double-blind peer review. Having hasher reviews and lower acceptance rates
may not be a positive. It is not at all obvious to me, for example, that we will keep more women in computing under
a regime of harsher reviews and lower acceptance rates. "Why continue to seek approval, when you can leave science and 
do something else where you'll be appreciated?"


If we want, for example, to increase the representation of women, there are potentially other means that are less
intrusive and more positive, like, for example, including more women in the peer review process as reviewers, editors and so forth.
The same applies to other biases. For example, you should ensure that people from small colleges are represented,
or from poorer or non-English countries.  And what about including people who have less orthodox ideas?


"We show that women are underrepresented in the peer-review process, that editors of both genders operate with substantial same-gender preference (homophily), 
that the mechanisms of this homophily are gender-dependent."
Helmer M, Schottdorf M, Neef A, Battaglia D. Research: gender bias in scholarly peer review. eLife. 2017;6:e21718.

And furthermore, we can and maybe should revisit the computer science focus on exclusive conferences
with artificially low acceptance rates. In an online world, there is no shortage of "room" to accept more
papers. Yet we somehow insist on proping up a dominance hierarchy. 

Moreover, regarding biases, things change.

There is every indication that the bias against "non traditional" affiliations is less than
it used to be. For example, at least in Computer Science, it is will not do to be dismissive
of authors with Chinese affiliations. There is research showing that top schools have to 
increase sharply salaries because second tier schools become more attractive than they used
to be.

The bias against women in science is certainly much less significant than it used to be:

"Comparisons of oral non-gender-blind tests with written gender-blind tests for about 100,000 individuals observed in 11 different fields over the period 2006-2013 reveal a bias in favor of women that is strongly increasing with the extent of a field's male-domination. This bias turns (...) to about 10 percentile ranks for women in math, physics, or philosophy."

Thomas Breda, Mélina Hillion, Teaching accreditation exams reveal grading biases favor women in male-dominated disciplines in France, Science  29 Jul 2016.

In Ulf Sandström, Martin Hallsten, Persistent nepotism in peer-review, Scientometrics, Vol. 74, No. 2 (2008) 175–189

Our results indicate that female principal investigators (PIs) receive a bonus of 10% on scores, in relation to their male colleagues. 

My claim is not that being a young tall white man from Harvard conveys no benefit over
being a small black lady from Senegal but rather that it is naive to think that double-blind
peer review even the playing fieled.

So I will conclude by saying that though the problems that double-blind peer review seeks to address are real and significant, 
double-blind peer review is itself a rather crude and pessimistic solution that has several undesirable
consequences. I do not want to work in a field where people have to hide their identities so that they can get a fair shot. It sends the wrong message.